[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Robert Grant, and
this is "The Code-X."
[THEME MUSIC]
What is philosophy?
Well, if we break it down,
it's actually two words--
"philo," or "philo,"
and "sophia."
"Philo" just simply means lover.
And "sophia" means wisdom.
Philosophia is lover of wisdom.
But philosophy
was never intended
to be something that was
simply the study of rhetoric
or of what other philosophers
said and thought.
Maybe that was an element of
it, but in the ancient sense,
philosophy was irrevocably tied
to the concept of polymathy.
A polymath-- also,
in the ancient sense,
"poly" simply means many,
and "math" meant learning.
Philosophy was not
specifically an area of study.
It was something that came
as a result of studying
many different things,
and those things
would be a mix of what is today
referred to as the quadrivium.
The quadrivium is referring
to music, geometry, astronomy,
and arithmetic.
Today, we teach
children that math
is entirely separate from
music, when actually, it's not.
We also teach our young
people that art has nothing
to do with science, when
actually, that is false.
The way we're teaching our
children in the world today
is separating them out
from their own things
that they would like to
pursue in their lives.
I was a musician who
had to give up music
when I decided to become
a responsible contributor
to society.
But if I could still be able
to practice music and also
recognize that it is the
foundational form of geometry
that informs all
science, then all matter
and all energy in
the entire universe,
isn't that something
that's important to know?
We often think of our brain
as some sort of a hard drive
for information.
But what if we looked
at this differently?
What if we recognize that the
brain is really just a radio
receiver and that in order
for us to tune the receiver,
our emotional state has
a huge impact on that.
In this analogy, we could
say that the brain is a radio
and the heart is
the tuning dial.
If we take this
analogy even further,
then maybe some
certain things we
need to do to be able to
optimize our radio receivers
and their tuning would
actually benefit us.
If we were a runner and we only
exercise one half of our body,
that would really
cause a problem
for having the balance required
to be a very successful runner.
The mental athlete
and philosopher
knows that they must have
a balance of understanding
to tune their minds
and their brains
to their optimal
performance to receive
universal consciousness.
If we look through
time, we'll notice
that the people that seem to
discover the most mathematics
and physics throughout history,
from Pythagoras and Plato
to Socrates, in
concepts not only
relational to geometric forms,
like the platonic solids
or musical ratios and intervals,
like Pythagoras discovered,
but all the way up into
including discrete mathematics
as well as physics.
Isaac Newton discovered
gravity, but Isaac Newton
was also a musician.
A lot of people don't know
that he was a deep alchemist.
In fact, 80% of
his works were all
centered around concepts
of alchemy and astrology.
Isaac Newton believed
that he was finding
the signature of the creator.
He was a deeply spiritual
man, and he realized
that everything was connected.
Just like Johannes
Kepler, who gave us
the Kepler's laws of motion.
He, also, was looking for this
architect of the universe,
understanding, as well,
the musical concepts
in what he termed the
harmony of the spheres.
If we go to René Descartes,
the famous philosopher who
references "I think; therefore,
I am," also, a mathematician,
he's the person who gave us the
Cartesian plane in mathematics.
As we go through
history, we start
to realize that
even mathematicians
like Leonhard Euler--
Euler was an innovator
not only in math
but across music, as
was Bernhard Riemann,
of the famed Riemann
hypothesis, still
an open problem in mathematics,
yet to be fully proven.
He's also famous for
Neo-Riemannian music theory.
It's interesting, isn't it?
Because today,
we've broken up all
of these different
disciplines into
their individual categories
and never the Twain shall meet.
Thus, turning off our ability
to receive from the universe.
Ramanujan was a
famous mathematician
who was deeply spiritual also.
He was never trained
directly in mathematics.
Yet, Cambridge University,
the same university
from which we had Isaac
Newton, declared Ramanujan one
of the top mathematicians
of all time.
Yet, Ramanujan claims that
his discoveries mathematically
were received from a
great universal source.
I fundamentally
believe that, as well.
As one who has tapped into this
higher consciousness from time
to time, what I
experience is actually
that they all come out as
equally balanced across science
and art.
When I'm drawing
geometry, I'm not
trying to draw an artistic form.
Most of the time
in my efforts, I'm
actually trying to
discover and understand
a principle of the universe.
And while I'm trying
to depict it in a way
that my mind can synthesize, it
comes out in an artistic way.
I believe that the
future of humanity
is to go deeply into this
next stage of our evolution,
to realize that our brains are
not actually simply hard drives
and storage units of information
but rather, radio receivers
with which to receive
and understand
the universal language
of consciousness.
I've said before I don't
really consider myself
much of a mathematician because
I don't want to be pigeonholed
into my way of thinking.
The old adage applies.
If you're a hammer,
then everything
starts to look like a nail.
What I noticed is that for me
to get deeper into understanding
of mathematics, often,
it is through the doorway
and portal of music
or art or philosophy
that I'm able to
tap into a higher
understanding of
the underlying math
and language behind
the concepts I'm
trying to understand further.
We've all seen the very
famous Sistine Chapel
in the fresco in the ceiling.
And I remember going there
for the very first time
and just being awestruck at
the beauty of Michelangelo's
artwork on that
Sistine Chapel ceiling.
We've all seen, also,
Adam outreaching to God
in this representation.
But I remember the first
time I went there, I
started to ask myself the
question, what is it that's
around God in the painting?
Could it possibly be the cross
section of a human brain?
And as you get deeper
into that analysis,
you'll notice that the
cerebellum is prominently
displayed on the right side.
You can also see all of
the different aspects
of the prefrontal cortex,
the temporal lobe.
All of it being displayed
simply in this artistic form
that he left on the ceiling
of the Sistine Chapel.
Even God the Father, in
this famous iconic image,
has his leg shaped in a mirrored
imagery of Adam's right leg,
just as the fingers
outreaching to each other
are mirror images
of the same concept.
What's Michelangelo
trying to tell us?
Is he trying to
tell us something
about the nature of the
universe and the U-inverse?
We also notice that
God the Father's head
is in the prefrontal cortex,
where the brain has its highest
degree of higher order
thought and creativity.
But what if the only
means to tap into this
and move beyond this reptilian
brain of fight or flight
is to balance the muscle?
The mental athlete will know
that he or she must be balanced
above all else, and
that balance can only
be achieved
intellectually by having
an understanding of music and
its equal, mirrored opposite
across the corpus
callosum, mathematics.
Math and music are
simply representations
of two opposite
sides of our brain,
but that's also true as
well for visual art, which
we have near our occipital
lobe at the back of the brain.
And its mirrored
opposite representation,
in this context, is
the natural sciences.
So we can now see the brain as a
different kind of receiver that
ultimately is intended to
ignite and activate the center,
right amid the corpus callosum,
the connective tissue that
allows us to both think
and feel simultaneously.
As we can balance
our brain muscle
through our study
of the quadrivium,
then we can actually activate
the pineal and pituitary
glands.
And when we do so,
it forms a merkaba.
That merkaba allows us to access
different fields of awareness
that are above and beyond our
third and fourth dimensional
planes of understanding.
The philosophers
knew this, and yet it
was something that
could be very dangerous
during their lifetimes.
Because as they got to this
point of higher knowledge
and ascension, their
lives were at risk,
and this has been seen over
and over and over again
throughout history.
The good news for us
today is we're now
living in a different time.
The Earth is intended,
now through this aion,
this portion of our
procession of equinox
and this age of Aquarius
is intended for us
to be able to seek and not
only seek but also experience
this level of higher awareness.
That what the
philosophers experienced
and all the myriad
discoveries that they
had in their renaissances
throughout time,
will now be coming
again to this Earth.
Carl Jung was a very famous
psychologist and psychiatrist.
Carl had been a protege
of Sigmund Freud,
but he realized the
limitations of Sigmund Freud's
philosophical perspective
on psychiatry.
And he noticed that most
of the concepts of Freud
were rooted in these very
arcane approaches and belief
that mankind was
literally chained
to the lower segments of the
Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
But Carl Jung believed a
different future for humanity.
As a philosophical
wisdom-seeking alchemist,
Carl Jung noted that there was
a divine future for humanity.
He called this process
individuation in a book
that he wrote, called "Aion."
This individuation
process is something
that is achieved through
balanced thought and study
resulting in philosophy.
What Carl Jung
believed is that as we
ascend to higher
knowledge through learning
to balance our brain centers
across the quadrivium,
that we will be able to
experience new higher
dimensional experiences
provided however, that we learn
how to integrate our shadows.
If we live in a U-inverse,
every experience
you have is your responsibility.
My experiences are
my responsibility.
Fear could be real from
the perspective of danger.
Danger is real, but fear,
actually, is a choice.
How we interact and deal
with the deck of cards
that we are dealt on
a day-to-day basis
is what defines our reality,
not the deck of cards
that we're given.
Every moment that we
experience can either
be the best or the worst.
The choice is up to us.
How we decide to
perceive the world
defines our ultimate
experience with it,
and Carl Jung understood
this, and he taught this
in the concepts of
shadow integration.
Whatever we're judging
in other people
is actually what we
do and simply don't
want to acknowledge in
our conscious minds.
And as we understand
this, we start
to see the world around us
in a very different way.
This is the mirror
of consciousness.
In order to access higher
planes and dimensions,
we have to learn to transcend
these notions of duality,
even down to the very
basic concepts of how
we perceive light and dark.
The word "guru" comes
from two Sanskrit terms--
"gu" and "ru," which
means light from dark.
The light needs the dark as much
as the dark needs the light.
Even the very separation
of that light from dark
is simply the polarity
of our own perception.
The alchemists
knew this concept.
They taught it in a process
called the alchemical path.
And you can find it in
numerous images, both
found in hermeticism
and Rosicrucianism
and its many different
orders and forms.
You can imagine that each
of us is like a iceberg,
and imagine that your
conscious mind is
the component of the iceberg
that's above the water.
It lives in a world
that it believes
it's separate from altogether.
All the while, the iceberg may
not even be consciously aware,
if it were sentient,
that most of the iceberg
is actually underwater.
It perceives all of
it as being separate.
But what if that entire world
above the surface of the water
were actually a projection
from the iceberg that is
under the surface of the water?
This is the philosophy that
was taught to us by Carl Jung.
Everything spins
and all experiences
come back to oneness, but
it's up to us to perceive it.
In alchemy, the way that this
process of the alchemical path
is represented is through
the representation of birds.
These different categorizations
of the alchemical path
are broken into the following
categories and stages--
nigredo, or blackening,
the albedo, or whitening,
the rubedo, or the reddening,
and the final stage,
which is the phoenix.
These different
stages are represented
by a crow for nigredo, a
swan for albedo, a pelican,
representing
sacrifice for rubedo.
These images are contemplated
and well portrayed
in numerous pieces
of hermetic art.
Often at the center, we will
find the divine hermaphrodite,
often depicted as wearing
both a black cloak on one side
and a white cloak on the other.
We see also the archetypes of
Apollo, the god of the sun,
and Diana, the god of
the moon, representing
our own way of
seeing the masculine
and the feminine
energies of our universe.
They are accompanied often
by similar archetypes
of the phoenix that is
on fire that is adjacent
to Apollo, holding the sun
in the palm of his hand,
and in fact, next to a
rampant and powerful lion,
representing courage.
Whereas, Diana,
on the other hand,
is holding the moon
in her left hand
and accompanied by the deer and
all the representations that
accompany that, the
aguila, or the thunderbird.
All of these are simply
different perspectives
across polarities of male
and feminine perception.
And yet, in order for us to
merge these worlds together,
we must balance our minds and
learn to observe rather than
to judge.
Jesus gave two
great commandments.
He said love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, might,
mind, and strength, and love
thy neighbor as thyself.
Then he goes on
to say judge not,
lest you be judged with the
same judgment with which you
have judged others.
His message was not one
of hate thine enemy.
Take out an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth,
as had been taught
in the Old Testament.
But the New Testament was one
that was more about good news.
Don't judge because really,
you're just judging yourself
and secondly, love your
neighbor as yourself.
The stages of alchemy
are intended for us
to be able to learn to
integrate our shadow side
and accept and love those
things about ourselves
that we have a hard
time accepting.
In the beginning, you'll
start noticing crows
in the world around
you, like, daily,
making their squawking sound,
causing all kinds of havoc.
And make it to the point where
it starts to really bother you.
Then you'll know you're
clearly in the nigredo stage,
or blackening stage, which
is where you're intended
to confront and learn the
aspects of your shadow,
those aspects of yourself
that you've repressed so
deeply into your
subconscious mind
so as not to identify
with them whatsoever.
These are the things that you
don't like about yourself.
Albedo is a respite, and many
confuse the stage of albedo
as an enlightenment
stage in itself.
You get a bit of
a break, and you
start realizing that life
isn't so bad after all.
Much of this activity
will be precipitated
by some life crisis.
And Carl Jung also
points this out,
along with all the other
alchemists through history.
As we proceed to
the next stage, we
start experiencing the
opening of our other eye,
our third eye, which
can see everywhere,
represented by
the peacock, which
has so many eyes on
all of its feathers.
This is represented
by the yellowing.
It's kind of a greenish-yellow.
And imagine the beauty of
the peacock opening up.
This is the center of this
wave of new experience.
You'll start experiencing these
things on a day-to-day basis.
In fact, you'll start to see
new experiences and perceptions
that you never had
noticed before.
Then, you'll be
introduced to the concept
of the animus and the anima.
The anima and the animus
would be the representation
of all those things that you
haven't liked about yourself
and have not been
attracted to in yourself
that personify the opposite sex.
Carl Jung says that as
we meet our anima, that
would be their opposite
personality type embodied
in the form of someone
you would not normally
think to be
attractive, and now you
find yourself magnetically
drawn to this personage.
This is called the rubedo.
The rubedo leads us to
the alchemical marriage,
a necessary step in process
of the final integration
of the shadow into
your consciousness,
whereupon you start to see
the world in terms of empathy,
love, and compassion.
The alchemical marriage is such
a critical aspect of alchemy
that it is something
that must be entered
into as a very sacred union.
Think of it not as a
physical union, per se,
but rather as a union of
the two sides of your mind--
the left brain, if
you're right-handed,
representing the rational
thought, the seats
of mathematics and
natural sciences,
like physics and chemistry.
And the right brain, being
the seat of music, creativity,
irrational thought,
out-of-the-box thinking
and as well, total creativity.
When we learn to merge
these two aspects,
then we find our lives take on
an entirely different meaning
and scope as if by overnight.
And then the soul emerges
as a newly-resurrected,
and we call this the
stage of the phoenix.
This is when the
soul takes flight
to experience, once again,
the oneness of self.
[MUSIC PLAYING]